# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [Unreleased]

### Fixed

- In table constructors, use record-style fields (`{a=1}`) in place of
  expression-style fields (`{['a']=1}`) only then the key is a valid identifier.
  For example, `{['foo/bar']=1}` was getting converted to `{foo/bar=1}`, causing
  crash.
- Functions with named and varargs crashed the parser (e.g.
  `f=function(x,...)end`).

## [1.4.0] - 2024-05-05

### Added

- Parallel processing: mutations and their costs are computed on several
  processes simultaneously. This results in approx. 2-3x faster packing of
  files. Parameter `-q` controls the processing queue length; this is the
  maximum number of solutions being explored simultaneously. Defaults to 12, but
  you can try increasing it if you have a lot of cores. `-P` controls the number
  of parallel processes in a pool, defaults to number of cores and can be
  usually left unchanged. `-q1 -P1` is identical to the old behavior.
- Reading PNG-carts and writing fake PNG-like carts. The advantage of PNG-like
  carts is that all data chunks can be compressed too, so can be useful for 512b
  - 64k intros. The disadvantage is that additional 16-bytes of headers are
  needed. Choose this output format with `-fpng`. The file ending is still .tic,
  but TIC-80 sees the magic bytes and detects them as PNGs.
- Shuffling data chunks during packing. This works only with PNG-like carts, as
  only they support compressing the entire cart.
- Loading .lua carts with multiple banks.
- Command line parameter `-s0` means iterate forever. Intermediate results are
  saved, as always. ([#16][i16])

### Changed

- The output format is defined with -f e.g. `-flua`, `-fpng`, `-func`, or
  `-ftic`. The `-u` and `-l` options have been DEPRECATED. If an output file is
  defined, pakettic tries guessing the desired output format based on the file
  extension of the output file.
- Size optimized the code generated by `--data-to-code`: use `:gmatch` instead
  of `string.gmatch`

### Fixed

- When packing multiple files, the initial minification of subsequent files
  continued using variable names from where the previous files had stopped.
- Parse error: `note` was parsed as `not e`

## [1.3.1] - 2024-01-09

### Fixed

- Parentheses are not needed when indexing calls e.g. `(a()).foo` can be
  `a().foo`
- Parentheses are needed in string literal method calls e.g. in `("abc"):sub(2)`
- Parse error when `--{` looks like subtraction followed negated table
  constant

## [1.3.0] - 2023-08-20

### Added

- Option `--data-to-code` (or just `-d`) that puts the data in
  hexadecimal strings in the code and adds a small stub to load the data
  in the string at right address
- Option `--no-load` to disable using the load trick altogether.
  `load''` is not entirely semantically identical to `function()end`, as
  the `load''` cannot access local variables in the outer scope.
  However, this is such a rare occurrence that only disable it when
  absolutely necessary.

### Changed

- Parse errors report the offending line more accurately

### Fixed

- Printing function calls with a single table or string parameter
- Local variables without immediate assignment crashed the parser
- The initial minification used reserved keywords (in particular: `or`)
- Handling carts with multiple CODE chunks
- Variable names that started with `or` or `and` could give an parse
  error; for example, in `x=1 orange=2` the first statement was parsed
  as `x=1 or ange`, followed by `=1` which gave the parse error.
- Escaping `\r` and `\f` in quoted string literals
- `-- {` was not considered comment, even though it was not considered
  permutation block either
- Add space between a numeral and following period when printing. For
  example, `1 ..2` (string concatenation) should not be printed as
  `1..2`, as LUA then parses the beginning of it as floating point
  numeral `1.`

## [1.2.0] - 2023-04-02

### Added

- Perform initial variable minification before starting optimization
- Constant folding: constant integer expressions are evaluated by
  pakettic, in case they compresses better
- More detailed reporting of the crunching results

### Fixed

- Spaces between tokens were not always printed even when needed
- Hex numbers with fractional digits had the fractional digits printed in reverse
- Hex numbers with an exponent raised an error when printed

### Changed

- The default compression level is now -z0; our benchmarking does not
  show significant advantage over -z2 (only 0.2% over the test corpus),
  yet it's almost 3 times slower. Use -z2 and higher only when you are
  desperate and absolutely need that last byte.

## [1.1.1] - 2023-02-03

### Fixed

- The operator precedence of ^ vs. unary operators was STILL wrong: it
  binds more strongly than unary to the operand on its left, but less
  strongly than unary to the operand on its right
- Long comments should be delimited by --[[ and ]], not --[[ and --]]

## [1.1.0] - 2023-02-01

### Added

- Treat --![ and --!] as multiline comments, so one can have debug code
  in unpacked intro, which is not included in the packed version

### Fixed

- The operator precedence of ^ vs. unary operators was wrong
- Numerals ending in . (e.g. "1.") gave parse error, but should be allowed

## [1.0.1] - 2023-01-02

### Fixed

- Parsing 'nil' gave an error.

## [1.0.0] - 2022-12-10

### Fixed

- Don't crash when optimizing carts without anything to mutate.
- Don't crash when packing code with method calls e.g. "obj:f()" (there was a bug both in the code formatter and the optimizer).
- Don't replace symbol "self", because it has a special meaning, so just to be safe.
- Parse method definitions correctly: function a:m()end is syntactic sugar for a.m=function(self)end
- Don't crash when formatting "do ... end" blocks
- Local functions now parse and print correctly.

## [0.1.0] - 2022-12-08

### Added

- Reading TIC-80 carts (.lua & .tic)
- LUA parser based on pyparsing
- Local optimization algorithms (simulated annealing, late acceptance hill
  climbing & diversified late acceptance search) that mutate the source code, to
  see if it compresses better
- Mutations include: variable shortening, flipping operators, reordering
  arithmetic, single vs. double quotes in strings, hexadecimals vs. decimals
- Magic comments to allow reordering statements and trying alternative
  expressions

[unreleased]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/compare/v1.4.0...HEAD
[1.4.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.4.0
[1.3.1]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.3.1
[1.3.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.3.0
[1.2.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.2.0
[1.1.1]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.1.1
[1.1.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.1.0
[1.0.1]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.0.1
[1.0.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v1.0.0
[0.1.0]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/releases/tag/v0.1.0
[i16]: https://github.com/vsariola/pakettic/issues/16